To implement the Comprehensive Plan of the Town of
Newcastle.

To coordinate development and redevelopment according
to plans collaboratively developed with community
members from the Town of Newcastle.

To equitably balance the regulation of real property with the
interests of the community as a whole.

To preserve and enhance the existing character of
Newcastle’s traditional walkable villages, to continue
to promote neighborly activity, to respect the existing
built form, and to honor the historic development pattern
inherent in the villages.

To protect and enhance unique ecological habitats,
including Damariscotta Lake, the rivers, Great Salt Bay, and
Deer Meadow Brook.

To conserve and promote human access to Newcastle’s
greatest amenities, the rivers, marshes, forests, farmland,
and other natural areas.

To require a strong connection and appropriate transition
between the public realm (streets and sidewalks) and the
private realm (yards and buildings).

To promote the adaptive reuse and preservation of existing
buildings.

To permit redevelopment and infill construction that
contributes to and preserves the character of Newcastle.

To provide a range of housing types, unit sizes, and price
points to accommodate diverse household sizes, income
levels, and stages of life, paying particular attention to
affordable housing to individuals and families with low and
moderate incomes.

To capture a fiscal return on investments made in
transportation and public utilities infrastructure by locating
higher intensity development within walkable villages.

To preserve and promote a full range of thoroughfare types,
including narrow, low-impact, and inexpensive streets that
promote Newcastle’s village and rural character.

To resolve design conflicts between vehicular and
pedestrian movement in favor of the pedestrian.

To preserve and enhance the availability and design of
Newcastle’s public realm, including access to nature,
parks, streets, and other civic space.

To allow for a range of business activity that supports
the local interest in promoting Newcastle as a center for
entrepreneurial activity, both in the villages and rural areas.
